Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Dan Zahavi. He's a
professor in the department of communication at the University
of Copenhagen. And today we're talking about his book
Being We Phenomenological Contributions to Social Ontology. So, Doctor
Zahavi, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to
everyone. It's my pleasure as well.
So let me first ask you, what is phenomenological
sociology, which is basically the framework you apply in
your book.
Well, I guess, I guess one might give different
answers. So I mean a historical answer would basically
point back to the work of Alfred Schutz, who
is often Recognized as the founder of homological sociology
and so what he did in the In the
early 30s was to try to solve specific problems
that he thought could be found in the sociology
of Bieber by using resources from Huso's phenomenology, especially
Husso's theory of intentionality. So, so again, I think
historically speaking, it was an attempt to basically engage
with, with foundational problems in sociology but using again
resources, tools, approaches that one finds in phmological uh
uh philosophy. So that was, sorry, so that was,
that was the kind of historical question, and I
guess another more systematic, uh, way of answering it
would be to say that that one of the
characteristic features of femological sociology. IS basically to look
at social reality through a focus on experiencing, acting,
feeling agents. So it's very much a kind of
a bottom up approach. We're trying to understand social
phenomena. By looking at, you know, primarily human beings
who are engaged in all kinds of different types
of actions and relations, and this is not supposed
to say that sociality and social reality does not
also consist of Institutions, power structures, and so on
and so forth, but the idea would still be
that in order to understand the impact of again,
institutions, nation states, nation states, uh. Hierarchical power structures,
etc. I mean we still need to factor in
the subjects who in all kinds of ways are
Constrained and affected by by these structures. So again,
the focus is very much on on subjects. Mhm.
Yes, and before we talk about we identities or
what being we means from this perspective, let's go
through some, uh, some concepts here that apply to
individuals just for people to get also a better
understanding of what your approach is about. So, first
of all, from the perspective of phenomenology, what is
individual subjectivity?
Yeah, so I guess I mean 11 way of
understanding it is basically to take one's point of
departure and experience and so individual subjectivity is basically
a reference to. The experiencing subject, I mean that's
one very kind of easy way I guess to
explain the term. One might also talk about one
might emphasize the role of embodiment. I mean that's
of course another classical phmological move. So talking about
a An individual subject is also to talk about
an embodied perspective on the world. It's a specific
point of view on the world, so it's very
much again focusing in on experience.
And what constitutes an I? I mean, what is
the self exactly?
Yeah, so, so, so this is of course a
slightly tricky question because I think, I also think
many feminologists would say that that we actually need
to make distinctions here. So there are different. Dimensions,
the different levels of selfhood, but if we start
with what I would consider to be the most
basic and most fundamental level, it again very much
has to do with first personal subjectivity. So to
speak of a self is not to speak of
something that If you want, has an existence. Beyond
or beneath or above our streams of consciousness, no
selfhood, most fundamentally speaking, is really about experiential subjectivity.
Again, it has to do with being a specific
perspective on the world, a perspective that is not
anonymous but precisely. Characterized by a fundamental subjectivity, so
I think that is the most fundamental dimension of
selfhood. And then one could talk of a number
of other ones, and I'm sure we will return
to some of them, but just perhaps to indicate
one contrasting notion, I mean this would be an
understanding of the self that is much more. Normatively
embedded and where one's self-identity might somehow be connected
to specific values, specific norms, specific professions, social roles,
etc. AND of course to, I mean, in many,
in many ways, I mean that's also very much
what we take ourselves to be. And so if
somebody were to ask me, well, who are you?
I would probably not say I'm a subject of
experience, even though that is correct, but it would
not be a very informative question. What I would
rather do would be to say something about my
profession, interests, what concerns me in the world. I
think that's another dimension of selfhood that is also,
I think, very important and which will also be
very important if we eventually are to start to
talk about re-identity.
Right, but is the self experientially grounded and pre-reflectively
present, or is it socially constructed and extended?
Yes, well, so, so I mean, I think the
answer to that question would, would come basically by
just appealing to the two different notions of, of
self that I just introduced. So, so I don't
think you can have a yes-no answer. I mean,
I think, I mean, my view would be it
is both. It is both experientially embedded and pre-reflectively
given. And that pertains to the self understood as
basically the subjectivity of experience and on the other
hand, it's also normatively constrained and extended and the
notion of self where I think it makes sense
to say. Those kinds of things are precisely this
normatively loaded notion that I just introduced. So again,
I think the self is a very complex and
many faceted phenomenon, and we need different kind of
conceptual frameworks in order to do justice to it.
Right, so before we get into, uh, the we
identity, there's one more concept that is important to
tackle here because we will get back to it
later on in our conversation. What is collective intentionality?
Yes, so, so, so I guess, I mean, uh,
I mean, perhaps the easiest way to, to introduce
this notion is by By taking one's point of
departure on individual intentionality, what is the kind of
default mode of intentionality, and of course in the
philosophical literature intentionality. I mean it has a very,
it has a very specific meaning. It's, it's not
exclusively connected to voluntary action. I mean sometimes one
talks about having intentions in the sense of now
I want to do something. But in the philosophical
literature, intentionality basically refers to the fact that consciousness
is about something or consciousness is directed at something,
so my perceptual states are intentional in the sense
that they are directed at the table or the
monitor or the street outside my window. So perception
is intentional. I can have feelings that are intentional.
I can love somebody. I can hate somebody. I
can be afraid of somebody. I gain, all kinds
of different intentional states, but all these examples, I
mean, are basically individual types of individual intentionality where
I am the one who is somehow. Engaged with
an object or a topic of some kind, and
the interesting point is then that we can also
talk about collective intentionality where several people together are
either doing something or making decisions together or having
emotions together, emoting together. So the point is similar
to, I mean, I mean, and this is of
course one of the challenging things and one of
the reasons why people have been. Thinking about collective
intentionality, how do we move a notion that seems
so embedded to the individual mind? I mean, to
what extent can we apply that to a to
a collective, I mean, I mean, do we need
then to postulate the existence of some kind of
group mind? I mean, is there something like that,
or should we somehow understand? Well, the subject of
the collective intentionality in a different way. But again,
just to make, I mean, a very, again, very
simple examples. I mean if, if, if the two
of us are now having a conversation, I mean
that would actually be something that involves a form
of collective intentionality. If, if the two of us
were to move a table together, we would be
moving it together again. That would be a joint
action, something we were doing together. So those, those
would serve as examples of collective intentionality.
I understand. Yeah, and what is then we identity?
Yeah, so, so, so I guess one of the
things that I, um, that I'm trying to do
in the book, and perhaps I should just say
a little bit about, uh, at this point about
the kind of move I'm making in the book
because collective intentionality, I mean, as I just indicated,
I mean it has been a topic that has
been. Discussed extensively, especially in analytic philosophy for the
last, say, 35, 40 years. What is interesting though
is that it's actually not a new topic. It
was also discussed in early phenomenology, for instance, by
Schutz that we referred to a moment ago. And
what I have been trying to do in the
book is to some extent to also go back
to some of these early discussions, discussions that more
or less took place between the outset of World
War I. Until the early 30s, so it's a
period of about 20 years when a lot of
philosophers coming out of this homological tradition were really
engaging with problems also connected to collective intentionality. And
one of the things that I think they are
highlighting to a larger extent than much of the
contemporary debate. It's precisely at this point that if
we want to understand collective intentionality. We shouldn't merely
look at how, say, the intentions of different individuals
can somehow intertwine or merge to such an extent
that they now constitute an instance of collective intentionality.
That's important as well. But what we should also
look at is precisely the question of self-identity, the
question of to what extent. Our engagement in collective
intentionality is both something that affects and influences our
identity as selves and also something that might be
enabled and facilitated by the identity we are having.
So I'm kind of saying, you know, rather than
just looking at the specific intentions, let's try to
bring in this topic of identity as well. And
that's where then the question of the we pops
up because you know how do we articulate types
of collective intentionality? Well, we usually do that by
referring to the To the first person plural pronoun,
I mean, we are saying we are having a
conversation, we are moving a table together, we are
making a decision. So there's this, this we that
I think needs to be better understood, um. Um,
YEAH, so, so, so, basically, I guess, I mean,
one of the questions is when talking about a
we identity, what, what exactly is a we? Is
a we some kind of group mind of, of
a somewhat mysterious nature, or should we understand the,
the, the nature of this we differently? I mean
this is, this is part of what I have
been trying to, to do in the book.
Mhm. And so let's explore that a little bit
more. What is then the relationship between plural and
individual selfhood?
Yeah, so, so again, I mean, um. I mean
it's interesting that different disciplines might have different answers
to that question. I mean, so there are, I
mean, I mean, I think sociologists. Oh, it's always
a bit dangerous to generalize. So let us say
some sociologists and some cultural psychologists and some anthropologists.
Might be tempted by the proposal that plural selfhood,
we, the community has a kind of priority vis
a vis individual selfhood or individual subjectivity. So there
might be this idea that in order to be
an individual, this is actually something that is enabled
by A social environment of a very specific kind.
So it's basically by being born into being socialized
within being inculturated within a very specific community that
we start to gain an identity as an individual.
So, on, on, on this kind of approach, a
priority would be given to rural selfhood. My view
would be somewhat different because here I would again
appeal to my previous distinction between different notions of
self. And I would say there are some notions
of self where I think it does make sense
to say that the community has a certain priority.
I mean, imagine thinking about. You know, I mean,
my identity as a professional philosopher, my identity as
a professor of philosophy, I mean that is something
that matters to me. It's something I have. Both
spend a lot of time achieving and it's a
way for me to fulfill my life. So this
is a very important part of my identity, but
I don't think you could be a professional philosopher
or a professor of philosophy. If you were, you
know, socially isolated, I mean, these are clearly professions
and and social roles that are embedded within and
requires a very complex cultural, social background. So there
are in some senses, I mean, in some senses
and in some cases, I, I do think it
makes sense to give a priority to some kind
of community and we. But then I would also
say there's another notion of self that I think
is prior to and is itself a precondition for
a community and a we, and that is the
experiential notion that I was referring to earlier. I
don't see any prospects for claiming that. Individual subjectivity
understood as, you know, Experiential subjectivity. That that is
somehow reliant on or based on the outcome of
some kind of social construction. On the contrary, I
think that sociality intersubjective relations, and also the emergence
of a we perspective is something that requires a
plurality of individual perspectives. So, so I mean, So,
so responding to your question, what is the relationship
between individual and plural selfhood? I mean it depends
a little bit, but, but if you want, I
mean if you want my take on where the
story has to begin, I would say it has
to begin with individual subjective experience, and then there
will be a kind of a. There will be
a process that that that will then through community
through the we feedback to to the to the
to the nature of self will allow and allow
for richer and more complex forms of self that
are then dependent upon a community and a we,
but, but again which that has then other preconditions
including individual experiential subjectivity.
And how about consciousness? Is it really a private
phenomenon?
Well, uh, so I, so I think, again, I
mean, I don't think one can say yes and
no here because I think, I, I think consciousness
are many different things. I mean, I do think.
I do think there is something. Um How to
put it, I think we need to recognize the
existence of what might be called epistemic asymmetry. Understood
in the following sense when I'm living through experiences,
I, I'm acquainted with those experiences in a way
that differs from how observers. WOULD be acquainted with
my experiences. So I mean again if I'm very
depressed. I'm living through that in a different way
that people who are around me might pick up
on it, and if I'm hungry again, I will
experience that in a different way than other people
will do. So today's something special, something distinct about
my own acquaintance with my ongoing experiences, and if
you want to call that private, that's fine with
me. What is then, however, important is not to
reduce consciousness to that because I, I think, and,
and I think this is really important if one
is to also understand how something like. A shared
perspective might emerge. I think it's very important not
to somehow commit to the idea that consciousness is
exclusively private, that consciousness is only accessible to the
to the subject of. That present consciousness and completely
hidden and opaque and invisible to everybody else because
were that the situation we were finding ourselves in.
I think the problem of other minds, I think
the problem of sociality, the problem of engaging meaningfully
with others would be much more difficult than they
are in fact, and I think it would be
very hard to make sense of something that I
think is very important for the emergence of a
wee perspective, and that is the presence of what
I would call shared experiences, the fact that we
can. I mean, I mean, to, to take another
uh uh notion that is also, uh, you know,
widely used the notion of joint attention, I mean
that, that both of us, if we are, say,
in, in, in a, in a, uh, I mean
if we, if we are in the same physical
environment. I mean we might pay attention to the
same thing and we and through communicative eye gaze
we might make it apparent to both of us
that we are now paying attention to the same
thing. All of this happened usually in a very
fluid, unproblematic manner, and I mean I think the
fact that we can communicate in this way. I
mean it's a very important building block for for
higher levels of, of, of joint or collective intentionality,
and I think it would be very hard to
make sense of these very Again, simple ways of
interacting with each other if in fact we had
been in the position that I was warning against,
namely the position where consciousness is really exclusively a
private phenomenon and completely hidden to everybody else. Yeah,
so, and, and I'm sorry, and then the question
of course is, well, what is it then that
is visible to others? I mean, of course I
was pointing out that there's, when I'm living through
my experiences, there are I have a certain acquaintance
with those experiences that is different from how others
might. Access them, but I would, but I would
precisely say, I mean, when, when we are interacting,
I don't think that what you are primarily confronted
with. It is a kind of meat machine, you
know, that that discloses or manifests different contortion of
muscles with no psychological meaning. I think that would
be a very strange description of our conversation. Hopefully,
I mean you are seeing me as somebody trying
to express my thoughts and showing interest in your
questions, etc. ETC. I think that's the natural way
of of of of describing what is going on.
So I would say that our experiences, our conscious
life is exactly. Being expressed in bodily gestures, facial
expressions, actions, and that all those things have psychological
meaning. That is also a way for the mind
to, to, to manifest itself, and that is a
dimension that other people can pick up on.
Uh, ON the topic of intersubjectivity, how is it
established? Is it via detached mind reading or what
psychologists usually call theory of mind, or does it
depend on normative relations and shared values?
So I mean I, I, I know it's getting
a little bit repetitive because here again I would
say you know you can't give a yes no
answer here because it's a subjectivity. Again it's complex
and there are many different ways in which it
can be established. So I think that the, the,
I mean the, the correct answer to your question
would, would, would basically be to say yes to
all of the proposals. I mean. AND I don't
think anybody ought to deny that of course sometimes
we do employ mind reading, sometimes we do employ
a theory of mind, sometimes we do engage in
imaginative perspective taking. I think all of that is
given, but I think the interesting question and I
think one of the areas where The philological tradition
that I'm kind of coming from has had something
to add to the kind of standard way social
cognition has been discussed in the literature is precisely
to emphasize that in addition to all these. Other,
you know, procedures, there's also a more basic, more
foundational form of perceptually based embodied relations. So, so
I think in addition, so, so again, I mean,
you know, if If I, if I encounter somebody
on the street who is crying, I mean, I
don't think my first impulse would be to engage
in imaginative perspective taking and trying to figure out
what could possibly Cause me to be in a
situation like that in order to figure out what
the person might be living through, nor do I
think I would in the first instance try to
consult various textbooks in psychological theory. No, I would
in a much more spontaneous way pick up on
this distress of the person, and I think it's
very important not to overlook. This whole embodied dimension
to our intersubjective relations, and I also think, I
mean, you know, looking from the perspective of developmental
psychology. That that is, you know, as far as
I can see, also the, the, the kind of
entreprenetically first way of engaging socially for the infant,
I mean something like theory of mind is only
something that becomes. Available at a at a at
a later stage in development.
And so what is then or how should we
think about the relationship or the interplay between the
I and the we? I mean, to what extent
is the eye a condition of possibility for the
we and to what extent does the we uh
have an impact on the nature and structure of
the eye?
Yeah, so, so, so I, I think one way
to, to approach that question, I mean, is, is
basically again to think about what exactly do we
mean by a we, and I, and I mean
I, I used earlier the The phrase, it's it's
the first person plural pronoun, and I think it's
very important to kind of To keep both notions
in mind that it's first person and that it's
plural. So the plural part obviously suggests that there
has to be a certain plurality, and I think
that is one way of doing away. With the
conception of a group mind, if the group mind
is understood somehow as an expanded singular mind, I
mean, again, so I don't think the right way
to think about the we is to think of
it as a bigger I. I think that we
is very importantly and kind of constitutionally. Dependent on,
dependent upon the presence of a plurality of perspectives,
it, it's a specific kind of integration. A relation
between I mean a plurality of diverse perspectives and
referring back to that diversity of perspectives, I mean
that's then where the first person point comes in
because I think it's precisely a plurality of first
person perspective. So in the absence of an eye,
in the absence of first person subjectivity. I don't
think it makes any sense to talk about a
we, and, and I mean that will allow me
also to make one other point because when talking
about groups, I think it's very important to to
understand that a we. It's a very specific type
of group. I mean there might be groups where
you can be a member, where your membership is
basically something that can be assigned from without in
the sense that, you know, whether or not you
are a citizen of a specific country, I mean
it might for instance be a A question of
where you were born, it's not up to you.
It's not your decision. So I mean, again, whether
you count as a member of that national community
or not is, is again something that is externally
determined. Likewise, I mean, whether you are a member
of, uh, I don't know, a certain social class
or whether you A member of a specific, you
know, health group. Again, it's not up to your
decision. It's not up to, it's not, it doesn't
depend upon whether you agree or not. It's, it's
really based upon the presence of specific external properties.
If you have those properties, then you are a
member of the group. If you don't have, you're
not. Those are all kinds of groups, I think
we is something very, very different. Because I don't
think you can be assigned membership of a we
independently of your own perspective on it. I mean,
I think this is also one of the reasons
why we is a first person plural perspective. So,
so being a member of a we is also
something that involves your own identification with. The group
in question, and if you do not identify with
the group, well then you are not part of
the we in question. So I think that Uh,
again, I'm coming back to your question, is, is
an I a precondition for, for we are not?
I mean, my, my, my argument would definitely be
yes. I mean, because, I mean, if you don't
have. If you don't have a first person perspective
to start with and if you do not engage
in processes of identification with The other group members,
I mean, you will not be a member of
the we in, in question, um.
Mhm. Um, AND what does the fact that individuals
can identify with the group and adopt a we
perspective tell us about the nature of selfhood and
self-identity?
Yeah, so I mean that brings us again back
to this earlier, uh, distinction between different types of,
uh, of, uh, of, of self because As I
said, there is a normative, I mean, on a
certain normative understanding of the self. I mean our
self identity is precisely connected to social roles, values,
norms, and that's why. You would know something about
who I am if I started telling you, you
know, what political party I'm voting for, you know,
what values I take to be absolutely crucial, etc.
ETC. Uh, uh, AND, and the point then is,
as I said, uh, in order to be part
of a, we, I mean, you need that, you
need to identify, and the question, of course, I
mean one of the questions, well, what exactly are
you identifying with. Are you identifying with the specific
Other individuals who are members of the group and
that I mean it might be that we will
later have to also then distinguish different types of
wes because there are different types, but normally I
would say the identification with a we is not.
You know, in many instances it's not. Connected to
the specific individuals that make up the we, because
if that were the case, Well then, the moment
there were a change of members, I mean we
would somehow no longer, I would change, and I
mean I think for many of us, I mean
that's not. The experience we are having, I mean,
I might identify, ascertain. That does not entail that
I'm identifying with all the other Danes that are
currently in existence such that the moment one of
them died, suddenly my identity is under, you know,
is being challenged. So I think, I think a
more reasonable claim would be that what I'm identifying
with are precisely. Specific values, commitment, norms that I
take to be relevant for my identity. So I
think in order to understand how I can start
to identify with authors who are sharing the same
norms, commitments, values, history, cultural background, or whatever type
of we we are talking about. In order to
be able to do that, well, all of those
elements, cultural background, history, social roles must be something
that is also relevant for my own self identity,
and I think the self that we are talking
about here is not this more minimal experiential self.
I mean, simply having or possessing a first person
perspective because that's too, it's too formal. If, if
that was all we were, I think it would
be very hard. I mean to imagine or to
understand how something like the kind of much more
robust, you know, type of we can can emerge,
whereas I think if we, if we allow. You
know, for the existence of several different dimensions of
self, and if we recognize that one of those
dimensions precisely has to do again with value, rituals,
traditions, well then we have some material that can
also constitute the glue. That can then connect us
with authors that likewise partake in those types of
identities. So, so I mean that's roughly the way
I would, I would understand the, the, the process.
Mhm.
And how are collective intentionality and the we perspective
related to social cognition and interpersonal understanding.
Yeah, so, so, so again, I mean, uh, I
mean, it's one thing to, to, you know, to,
to, to look at the relationship between the I
and we arguing, well, I mean, I cannot be.
A member of a we, if I'm not an
I and it needs, it needs identification with the
group, I mean, all of that is fine, but
of course we should not forget. The plural part
of the we, I mean that a we is
always more than just me. I mean a we
is something that by necessity involves other participants as
well. And in order to understand what it means
for me to be a member of a we.
We also need to look at my relationship to
those other members, and I mean one of the
interesting. Questions of course has to do with with
the with the following point. Is it enough? I
mean, is, is my identification with the we sufficient
for me being a member of the we? Is
it only up to, to myself? Or does it
also require the recognition and acknowledgement and acceptance of
of of other members, and I mean, I think
typically we would say, well, I mean somehow the
others need to be on board to some extent,
at least with with my being part of the
identity that they are also part of. So we
need to look more closely at at also these
interpersonal relations. And here again I think that there's
a huge difference between how these questions were discussed.
In classical phenomenology and how they have been discussed
in more recent kind of literature because I mean
what one can find. In people like Searl or
Tumula, for instance, I mean, a clear acknowledgement of
the fact that there has to be some kind
of contact with or understanding of others in order
for something like collective intentionality to be possible. But
there's no further reflection on whether some form of
social cognition, some form of interpersonal understanding might be
more conducive. More enabling for collective intentionality than others,
and here I think that the feminologists have something
to offer precisely because they are distinguishing different types
of social cognition and what they would then highlight.
Is precisely the importance of this. Embodied Perceptually based
resonance between people. I mean, so again, to give
you, I mean a simple example, I mean if
we are to do something together or if we
are to enjoy something together that is share emotions.
I think the possibility of doing that. WILL be
much higher. I mean, if we actually have perceptual
access to each other's expressive embodied. Emotions than if
we are based in two separate rooms and have
to employ either imaginative perspective taking or more detached
theory of mind employment. I mean, when we are
together, I mean there's a form of synchronization. A
kind of intertwinement of our, I mean we can
affect each other, we can't be affected by our
emotional responses in a way that will just allow
for a much more tightly woven perspective on, on
a shared world than if we are kind of
running separate imaginative routines or more detached forms of
theorizing.
Uh, AND what are the types of social cognition
that are conducive to the emergence of a we
perspective? In the book, for example, you talk about
the role played by empathy, second person engagement, imaginative
perspective taking, and detachment, detached inferential mind reading. So,
uh, uh, let's start perhaps with empathy. What is
the role played by it?
Yes, so, so again, I mean, empathy is a
big, a big topic, and, and, and I mean,
uh. People are often understanding very different things about
under this label. So again, I have to make
it clear that when I'm talking about empathy in
the book and also in a moment. I'm talking
about empathy as this term was used by the
philological philosophers that I'm kind of drawing on, and
for them empathy refers precisely to this kind of
perceptually based embodied pick up of Uh, you know,
conscious states as they are, uh. Uh, MANIFEST in
our, in our bodily actions and, and expressions. So,
so empathy is not about Coming to have the
same kind of emotion as somebody else, it's not
about imagining what it would be like for me
to be in your shoes. It's not about that.
It's really about, I mean, if you are upset
and I'm seeing it in you, in the way
you are expressing it facially, bodily, for the femiologists
that would qualify as empathy. And given that that
is how they talk about empathy. And given what
I was just saying a moment ago, I mean,
I think it's obvious why empathy is important. For
the emergence of a kind of basic shared perspective
because it's precise in situations where we can empathize
with each other and especially in situations where there
are forms of reciprocal empathy that is, it's not
just me empathizing with you, it's not just me
picking up on the emotions you are currently expressing.
But you at the same time are doing that
vis a vis me. It's, it's exactly in such
constellations. That again say our emotional life will then
be able to You know, intertwine and allow for
a form of co-constituted emotion.
Mhm. And what about second person engagement? What is
the role played by that?
Yeah, so, so, so, so that's something we haven't
talked about, uh, yet, and, and, and that is
also something that I devote quite a lot of
time to in, in the book. So, so again,
I mean, if, you know, second person engagement, what,
what does that mean? I, I think the most,
uh, easy way to explain it is to, to,
to think of it. As the kind of attitude
you have when you relate to somebody as a
you, and so again, the, the, the standard idea
would be, well, I mean, I can think about
or relate to somebody as a he or she.
That would be from a third person perspective, but
I can also relate to somebody as a you.
And when thinking that true, I mean, my conclusion
was, and I'm certainly not the only one to
say that. My conclusion was that what is very
specific about a you relationship is that it has
to be reciprocal. I mean, I can relate to
somebody as a he or she even if they
have absolutely no awareness of my current attention to
them, but to relate to somebody as a you
is precisely to relate to and address somebody who
is reciprocating and who is in turn taking me
as. Hers or his is you. So there's something
intrinsically reciprocal about second personal engagement, and I think
that also suggests why it might be particularly important
for the emergence of a shared we perspective. I
mean, it's really, it's a, it's a kind of
an attitude that I cannot have on my own.
I can only adopt a you perspective. On you
if you kind of play along and the fact
that both of us have to be active again
suggests that that we are kind of moving into
position to then be able to in, in the
best of circumstances to, to do something together, to
share perspective uh together.
Mhm. And what about the role played by imaginative
perspective taking.
Yes, I mean, I, I, I mean, I mean
one of the problems with imaginative perspective taking is
that that is something I can do on my
own, and, and I mean, coming back to the
question about whether one can become a member of
a we. Unilaterally, I mean, can I myself decide
that I that I'm now a member of a
we? I mean, I find that a bit suspicious.
I mean, I think it does require to some
extent the acceptance of the authors. And of course,
I mean there are all kinds of complications because
if it's a very large, we again, you know,
the, the national community of Danes, for instance, what
are we supposed to understand by saying that my
Identification as a day requires the author's acceptance. I
mean, am I supposed to go around and ask
everybody else whether they accept me or not? I
mean, there's something of course very artificial about that
proposal, but But uh, but, but I think it
would be a problem if they denied me. I
mean, if they would not recognize me, and then
it would be difficult for me to uphold. That
kind of we identity or my membership of that
we identity. So, so again, I mean, I think
the problem with, with imaginative perspective taking is I
think it can help. To elaborate or cash out,
uh, you know, what, what we understand under the
we identity in question, and I mean one of
the arguments, of course, in the nationalism literature is
that when it comes to very large communities, very
large, uh, we, I mean imagination is somehow crucial.
Because the we in question will always involve people
that I've never met in person. So, so it's
a we that is not just based on actual
encounters. So imagination seems to somehow play a role,
but I think it, I mean, I guess what
I would be a bit Uh, worried about would
be the proposal that imagination on its own without
being supported by other forms of interpersonal understanding could
somehow, you know, uh, do, do the work. I,
I, I don't think that would be, be possible.
Mhm. And finally, when it comes to the emergence
of a we perspective, what is the role played
by detached, inferential mind reading?
Yeah, but I, but I, I mean, I think
much of what I, what I said about imaginative
perspective taking, I think would, would, would, uh, would
hold for, for detached mind reading, uh, as well.
I mean, because, because again, the point is that
that is a cognitive process. That I can undertake
on my own and you can do it and
I mean we can do it each independently and
I mean that just seems to be a very
different process. Then say the second personal engagement really
involves the contribution of participation of both parties. So
again I would say I mean social or interpersonal
understanding comes in many different. Forms and I think
you know our social life is so rich that
we also need to draw on many different kind
of means of of of of kind of you
know weaving us together, but But I, but I
really would want to give a certain priority. To
the kind of perceptually based. A relationship that that
allows also for immediate feedback, confirmation, or rejection. I
mean, it's in those situations where I think the
most fundamental forms of a we can can emerge.
And are there varieties of we with whom can
we constitute a
we? Yes, so I think that is of course
also very important. I mean, I've only kind of
alluded to it a little bit in the past,
but I mean, you know, descriptively speaking, I mean,
it's very easy to To vary the dimensions along
different kind of trajectories. So I mean we can
speak of Vs of different sizes. There can be
small wes and large wes. We can speak of.
Um, DIFFERENCES in, say, temporal duration, I mean they
can be very short lived, they can be very
long lived. I mean, so on the one hand,
I mean it might be a dyadic weed that
is. Established in the here and now of a
communication, I mean that's, that's one type of a
we, uh, uh, another type of a we again
would be, say, a transgenerational we, a we that
somehow endures over generations, could, could again be exemplified
by, you know, a family or a national community.
And I mean it's, so I mean we are
using the term we. In these different situations, but
it's clear that that how they are established, I
have very different explanations because I mean again there's
a huge difference between, you know, again a dyadic
we consisting of two people who are directly interacting
and say my Relationship to again I keep speaking
about the Danes, so let's just stick to that
example. I mean Danes that are long dead and
that I somehow identify with. Which for instance could
then come to, to, uh, it could be expressed
as when I was saying that we, we the
Danes were horrified when the Germans invaded the country
in 1940, for instance. I mean, so what, what,
what kind of we is that and it's clearly
a different kind than a dyadic one.
But do you think there are limits to the
dimension of the collective with whom we can be
part of what we?
I, I mean, I, I, I, I, I, I
guess it depends a little bit on what you
mean. I mean, because, uh, so, so what I
have, I have spoken so far on kind of
small scale. Wes, I mean, and those include not
just dyadic wes, triadic wes could also be small
neighborhoods. I mean, so where people are knowing each
other in person, I mean that's at least one
kind of standard case. Then there are much larger
wes. I mean it could be the organization. I
mean, I think the University of Copenhagen, I mean
if you count the students and all the employees,
it's perhaps 50,000 people. Obviously I don't know all
of them. I'm still, I mean I can still
talk of the we also when referring to the
University of Copenhagen and all my colleagues. We can
talk about a national community as even larger, but
of course also transnational communities. I mean, you know,
religions are an obvious case in point. Uh, I
mean, religions, I mean, yeah, world religions are not
restricted to a national community. It could be social
movements. It could be, you know. Climate crisis, activists,
perhaps one could even speak of a global community.
I mean, is there a we of All humans,
I mean, I, I, I, I mean. I would,
I would not rule that out. I mean, I
mean one interesting question could be what could motivate
us to start to think. Uh, LIKE that, and
I mean, I think that raises an interesting question.
I mean, the, the, the kind of example I
often appeal to when, when, when discussing this is
this. Uh, THIS American blockbuster movie, I think it
was called Independence Day, I think it's basically about,
you know, the earth suddenly being threatened by very
hostile extraterrestrials and suddenly all the Countries that were
in conflict on on Earth unite to fight off
the alien invaders and and and that of course
and the argument would be now suddenly you know
there's a kind of a global human community and
what I think the example illustrates is this question
of To what extent we need outsiders, to what
extent there needs to be a demarcation in order
for a we to take form. And my view
would be that I don't think it's always necessary.
I think there are instances of types of wes
that would not require. The demarcation, but I, but
I, but I also think that the demarcation can
Can transform and consolidate the we in question, and
I, and I mean, you know, again, if we
are to, if, if we are to start to
think about. All of us as part of global
humanity. I mean, I'm not sure that the most
realistic and regrettably, but I'm not sure that, you
know, ethical concerns or moral principles is what will
Allow for that. Perhaps it will more be either
an external threat. Or perhaps you know the threat
of of of planetary disaster and climate crisis that
suddenly makes us somehow realize that we need to
overcome our internal division if we are to solve
the problem. So, so, so, yeah, so, so, so
coming back to your question, I mean, is there
a limit? Because of course you could also say
now I introduced the extraterrestrials. Well, what about them?
I mean, could we in principle constitute a we
with them as well? I mean, could there be
a we of all conscious sentient creatures? In the
universe I mean, I'm not ruling it out, uh,
but, but I mean, I, but I, but I
just think that are different, you know, there are
different questions. I mean how. How would that identity
ever be more than a mere idea? I mean,
could it ever be fleshed out with content? I
mean, I guess that would be one concern, uh,
so the, so the more abstract or the more.
The larger the we becomes, I mean that I
guess there might be a certain danger of it
simultaneously also being emptied of of meaning. That could
be one problem or question. The other question would
be, this issue of motivation. I mean, what is
it that would motivate us suddenly to make this
global identification? I mean, I, and I don't, I
don't have, you know, some very thought out answers
to those questions.
Mhm. So I have one last question then, uh,
because we were talking also about, uh, different kinds
of we, there are two other different kinds that
I would like to ask you about. I mean,
what is the relationship between the thin we of
those who jointly establish the shared goal of solving
a task, act accordingly, and then disperse when the
goal is realized. And the thick we of group
members who are committed to a shared ethos.
Yeah, no, no, yeah, I mean, uh, I mean
it also dawned on me that when I was,
um, When I was saying that that you know
we can differ along different kind of dimensions and
mentioning, you know, the issue of size and the
issue of duration, I mean there's obviously also another
dimension that can be. Buried and that has to
do with the strength, I mean the strength of,
of, of the connection and and I and I
do think that I mean there are And again,
the thin thick is supposed to target this difference.
There are types of wes that are very, if
you will, strategically motivated. So it's about us now
joining forces to accomplish a specific goal. And we
might do that perhaps because it serves our own.
You know, interest, so I'm prepared to kind of
join in with you. Simply because it would also,
uh, you know, maximize my chances of realizing my
own independent goals and so we, we act as
a kind of a thin, thin we and the
moment we have achieved what we set out to,
to do. We dissolve, I mean, again, thin, thin
we, but of course there are thicker we's, I
mean thicker we's that that that are not just
motivated by us pursuing our individual goals, but that
have common goals. I mean where the goals are
really something we also decide upon jointly and where
also our our participation. And identification can withstand struggle
and setbacks. I mean, so it's not as if
the moment. The moment our collaboration runs into obstacles,
we would then say, OK, now it's too costly.
I'm kind of leaving. No, I mean, because it's,
it's, it's much more important to us. It's much
more important to our self-conception, our, our way of
life. That we partake in the we in question,
and so I think that Let me just to
add one more thing that that in order to
understand how something like These more robust forms that
we can emerge. I mean, I also think we
need to look beyond. Simply, you know, again face
to face interaction and and and kind of bodily
resonance, I mean to these more robust forms of
We typically also involve inculturation, shared social norms, traditions.
It's something also about your upbringing. I mean there's
a whole history of again. Community building behind them,
so it's a much more complicated, complex, normative hierarchical
structure and uh and again, so perhaps one can
say well you know that's the the most complicated
case and and and the the here and now.
Of the diet, I mean, is the, is the
most minimal case and so there's a huge variety
of different cases that are that are proper exhaustive
discussion of of the we would also have to
take into consideration. It was a pleasure talking with
you. And let it, let that be the end
of it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith and
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Janaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.